## Page 1

J. R. Statist. Soc. A (2002)
165, Part 2, pp. 317–334

# Predicting successful and unsuccessful transitions from school to work by using sequence methods

Duncan McVicar and Michael Anyadike-Danes
Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre, Belfast, UK

[Received January 2001. Revised September 2001]

**Summary.** Policy makers recognize the importance of identifying early young people who are likely to end up jobless on entry to the adult labour market. This paper uses sequence techniques to characterize 712 young peoples’ transitions from school to work into ‘types’, with jobless types interpreted as unsuccessful transitions. A logit model is estimated for transition type using a collection of static individual, family and school characteristics. This allows us to identify which young people are most likely to experience unsuccessful transitions into the adult labour market. Policy makers might use such information to target social and educational policy more effectively to promote social inclusion.

**Keywords:** Cluster analysis; Joblessness; Optimal matching; Sequences; Youth transitions

## 1. Introduction

Policy makers have long recognized the importance of ‘catching problems early’ if they are to be effectively dealt with in the most efficient way. This belief, that ‘prevention’ is better than ‘cure’, now pervades much of social policy in the USA and the UK. In particular, Governments now believe that if they can catch the future long-term jobless sufficiently early with targeted interventions then they may be able to prevent a slide into social exclusion. In this paper we identify a typology of transitions from school to work, one of which is essentially a transition into long-term joblessness, and show how young peoples’ background characteristics influence their chances of experiencing a particular type of transition. Such findings might potentially be used by policy makers to help to target early interventions more effectively.

Our data consist of a vector of static background characteristics and a time series sequence of 72 monthly labour market activities for each of 712 individuals in a cohort survey. The sequences follow each young person from the month in which they are first eligible to leave compulsory education (July 1993) for a further 6 years. Our problem is how best to use these data to identify ‘at-risk’ young people at age 16 years and to characterize their post-school career trajectories. The approach adopted here uses optimal matching (OM) (developed in genetics to compare complex protein sequences) and cluster analysis to enable a classification of these data into a simple typology of transition patterns.

Our motivation for the adoption of these methods is twofold. First, these sequence methods are ideally suited to the problem of reducing the dimensionality of our large database down to manageable and readily interpretable dimensions. Second, our data are

*Address for correspondence:* Duncan McVicar, Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre, 46–48 University Road, Belfast, BT7 1NJ, UK.
E-mail: D.McVicar@qub.ac.uk

© 2002 Royal Statistical Society
0964–1998/02/165317

---


## Page 2

&lt;page_number&gt;318&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

ideally suited to these sequence methods and provide an application which goes further, in terms of successfully estimating a regression model with sequence 'types' on the left-hand side, than has previously been possible.

The remainder of this paper is set out as follows. Section 2 presents the data and context for the study. Section 3 sets out the OM analysis of these data. Section 4 discusses the classification of transition types based on a cluster analysis of the OM distance matrix. Section 5 then uses this fivefold classification as the dependent variable in a regression analysis of the transition type. Section 6 discusses the sensitivity of the results to changes in assumptions at the various stages and Section 7 concludes. The data that are analysed in the paper can be obtained from

http://www.blackwellpublishers.co.uk/rss/

## 2. The data and the context

Our data are taken from the 1999 sweep of the Status Zero Survey (see McVicar et al. (2000)). The survey was first carried out, by means of face-to-face interviews, in June 1995 with a sample of 980 young people (from a cohort population of 24000) from Northern Ireland who had completed compulsory education 2 years previously. For each sample member monthly activity (e.g. at school, at a further education (FE) college, in training, employment or jobless) was collected for the intervening 2 years along with a considerable amount of background information on qualification levels, parental employment status etc. In the June 1999 follow-up sweep, these background data and monthly activity information were updated to cover the first 6 years following the completion of compulsory education, or the years from age 16 to 22 years (and higher education (HE) was added as an activity category to reflect this older age group). The sample size was 712 in this most recent sweep and the panel is fully balanced. Appropriate weights adjust for response bias.

School is compulsory in Northern Ireland until age 16 years at which time (at the end of the academic year) young people are faced with several choices.

(a) Around half of our sample stayed at school either for 1 year (to retake previously failed examinations or 1-year vocational courses) or for 2 years (to take an academic qualification (A-level) with a small proportion taking a vocational qualification). Some young people, by combining 1-year and 2-year courses, or by repeating a year, stayed on for 3 years. School generally leads to HE or employment directly.

(b) Around 20% entered FE at 16 years of age, taking a similar mix of courses although more weighted towards the vocational end of the spectrum. This is also a stepping-stone to HE but many FE graduates enter employment directly.

(c) A further 20% entered Government-supported training schemes often based with an employer and involving work experience plus study towards a vocational qualification. This tends to lead to employment directly.

(d) The remaining 10% of the sample entered employment directly at 16 years of age or joblessness.

Fig. 1 shows the pattern of the cohort's economic activities from the October following completion of compulsory education (age 16 years) to age 22 years. Most young people are in some form of full-time education or training for the first 2 years. Most end up in employment by age 22 years, although many are still in HE and a significant proportion are jobless. There are three discrete jumps in the proportions engaged in the various activities, corresponding to

---


## Page 3

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;319&lt;/page_number&gt;

&lt;img&gt;
Proportion of Cohort
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Oct-93 Jan-94 Apr-94 Jul-94 Oct-94 Jan-95 Apr-95 Jul-95 Oct-95 Jan-96 Apr-96 Jul-96 Oct-96 Jan-97 Apr-97 Jul-97 Oct-97 Jan-98 Apr-98 Jul-98 Oct-98 Jan-99
<legend>
jobless
train
emp
fe
he
school
</legend>
&lt;/img&gt;

Fig. 1. Cohort activities (percentage of cohort), October 1993–March 1999 (source, Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre): the graph shows the proportion of the weighted sample in each activity each month; activities are the primary activity during the given month

the summers of 12, 24 and 36 months after completing fifth form education. Firstly, at age 17 years, there is a discrete fall in numbers attending school and a corresponding rise in numbers in employment. This is repeated at age 18 years, accompanied by a fall in numbers in training and a proportion entering HE. Finally, at 19 years of age, school numbers drop to 0, FE and training display a significant discrete fall and HE, employment and joblessness display discrete rises (the last slightly delayed). For the remainder of the sample period, numbers in FE, HE and training fall, whereas joblessness and employment rise.

To create a typology of youth transitions, we need a method of comparing the similarities between the 712 sequences of 72 monthly activity variables that lie behind the aggregate proportions shown in Fig. 1. In the following section we argue that OM analysis provides a suitable method for this purpose.

3. Optimal matching

Consider the following two sequences of activities (for this example we have simplified the 72 monthly activities into six yearly activities):

(a) school, school, HE, HE, HE, employment;
(b) FE, FE, FE, HE, HE, HE.

We want to classify sequences into groups that are in some sense similar. But how do we measure the difference or distance between them? OM is a method that measures distances between sequences such as those above by asking the question ‘how could we turn one sequence into the other with the least possible cost?’.

OM methods, first appearing in the 1970s, were developed for the analysis of protein and genetic sequences (Abbott and Tsay, 1999). The ‘distance’ measure between sequences that is the output of OM analysis is a measure of the minimum combination of replacements (substitutions), insertions and deletions that is required to transform one sequence into

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 4

&lt;page_number&gt;320&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

another. The development of the techniques is reviewed in Sankoff and Kruskal (1983). Abbott and Forrest (1986) first applied OM techniques to social science questions in a study of figure sequences in folk-dancing. Many social science applications have followed (e.g. Abbott and Forrest (1990) and Halpin and Chan (1998)). Analyses of career paths have been among the most numerous of these applications (e.g. Abbott and Hrycak (1990) and Halpin and Chan (1998)), although we are not aware of any study that was based on similar cohort data for young people.

The first step in the application of OM techniques is to specify a cost matrix for substitutions and insertions and deletions. The specification of these cost matrices tends to be somewhat ad hoc in the literature, although often guided by some simple rules. Abbott and Forrest (1986) have substitution costs reflecting the number of physical steps that are different between two figures of a dance, for example. Generally, this specification stage has been seen as one of the main weaknesses of OM techniques. Stovel et al. (1996) remarked that ‘the assignment of transformation costs haunts all optimal matching analyses’ (quoted in Abbott and Tsay (1999)).

We have six alternative activities for each individual-month. We adopt a cost matrix based on routes to different levels of employment in later life. Employment can be divided into professional, skilled non-professional, semi-skilled and unskilled or marginal. These employment types generally require different levels of education (level 4 or above for professional, level 3 for skilled, level 2 for semi-skilled and below level 2 for unskilled or marginal). Substitution costs between activities can be based on the rule of thumb that switching activities within an employment group should be less costly than switching activities that move individuals between groups. For example, level 4 education requires HE, which is fed almost entirely by school sixth forms and FE colleges. Therefore we cost switches between these three states cheaply, so that a sequence of school for 2 years and then HE is categorized as similar to a sequence of FE for 2 years and then HE. However, level 2 qualifications are far more common outcomes for those young people who have been in training schemes (see Armstrong and McVicar (2000) for details). Therefore we place a high cost on switching between school, HE and training. Switches to and from employment are cheap, with the exception of switches between employment and joblessness, to reflect the incidence of temporary jobs for students, years out and so on.

Table 1 shows one possible upper triangular substitution cost matrix reflecting this set of assumptions. Although not the only possibility, it has the property of giving smaller within-group distances than between-group distances for all except a few outliers. Insertion and deletion costs are set at 1.5 (low). This is referred to in what follows as the standard cost matrix. Identical sequences have a distance coefficient of 0. In the two-sequence example above, the cheapest way of changing sequence (b) into sequence (a) is by substituting school

<table>
  <caption>Table 1. Substitution costs for the standard cost matrix</caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>School</th>
      <th>FE</th>
      <th>Training</th>
      <th>Employment</th>
      <th>Joblessness</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>HE</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>School</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>FE</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Training</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Employment</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://rss.online
0.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms a
on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 5

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;321&lt;/page_number&gt;

for FE in the first 2 years, HE for FE in the third year and employment for HE in the last year. From Table 1 the total cost of this substitution is 4. This is then standardized so that the most distant sequences have a distance coefficient of 1. Since the maximum inter-sequence distance would be displayed by 6 years of joblessness compared with 3 years of school and then 3 years’ HE, a total substitution cost or insertion and deletion cost of 18, the normalized distance coefficient between sequences (a) and (b) above would be 4/18 = 0.22.

Section 6 discusses the sensitivity of our results to the adoption of alternative cost matrices—the standard cost matrix but with high insertion and deletion costs (indel = 4) and a unit cost matrix where all substitutions cost 1 (and indel = 4). This unit cost matrix is adopted in previous applications where there is no clear reason for specifying costs otherwise (e.g. Dijkstra and Taris (1995)). In our two-sequences example, the unit cost matrix would also yield a cost of 4 for turning (b) into (a), but the normalization factor (the maximum distance) would be 6, giving a normalized distance of 0.67. The various cost matrices are input to the OPTIMIZE program which then runs the OM analysis (for details of this software see http://www.svc.uchicago.edu/users/Abbot/optfdoc.htm). The output is a $\frac{1}{2} \times 712 \times 711$ matrix of standardized (and minimized) distances between each sequence. This distance matrix then forms the input to a cluster analysis as discussed in the following section.

We could carry out a cluster analysis of the sequence data directly—without going through the OM stage—using some other form of intersequence distance. In Anyadike-Danes and McVicar (2000) we did this with a distance measure based on the correlation of six binary state variables for each month (e.g. FE = 1 if individual i in month m is in FE and FE = 0 otherwise). A second possibility is to cluster directly on variables denoting the proportion of the sample period spent in each state. A further possibility is multiple correspondence analysis (e.g. van der Heijden et al. (1997)). None of these alternative methods can deal with temporal misalignment in the way that OM can, however (see for example Taris (2000)). The implications of this in our application, where the particular sequence of events can be important, are best illustrated by means of an example.

Consider four career sequences, with ‘E’ representing a year in employment and ‘U’ a year in unemployment: EUEUEU, UEUEUE, EEEUUU and UUUEEE. Both cluster analysis applied to the data directly and multiple correspondence analysis will treat the first pair of sequences as maximally different. OM analysis, however, by insertion and deletion of a single term, will treat these sequences as quite similar. Given that both sequences represent young people ‘dipping in and out’ of employment and unemployment in a similar way, the OM analysis is preferred. Clustering directly onto variables denoting the proportion of the sample period spent in each state would also treat the first pair of sequences as alike. This method, however, would treat all four sequences as alike, so young people dipping in and out of unemployment could not be distinguished from those ‘escaping’ long-term unemployment into stable employment, or from those falling into long-term unemployment from previously stable employment. In terms of targeting interventions, policy makers may view the latter group with more concern. At the least, a method that distinguishes these three groups is likely to be a better aid to targeting policy interventions than one that does not.

## 4. Cluster analysis

Cluster analysis is used to create homogeneous groups of cases (or, in our example, sequences) from large samples. Cases are grouped according to some distance measure

---


## Page 6

&lt;page_number&gt;322&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

between them. This allows complex information to be synthesized into a small number of clusters with similar patterns, or in our case similar career trajectories. In other words it offers a method for creating a simple typology of the transition from school to work, without necessarily discarding any of the information that is contained within the data and without imposing any stochastic restrictions ex ante.

Hannan and Doyle (2000) provide a recent application of cluster analysis to career trajectory data of young Irish people in transition from school to work. They reduce the monthly categorical data for each individual to 6-monthly figures that measure the proportions of the 6-month period that the individual spends in each of the different activities. This has the effect of turning categorical variables (e.g. 1, education, and 2, employment) into pseudo-continuous variables (e.g. the number of months in education in the last 6 months) for which more standard distance measures can be computed and clusters identified. Notice that this method discards information on the particular sequence of events within each 6-month period.

Cluster analysis has some well-known weaknesses (for a recent discussion see Morgan and Roy (1995)). First, different variants of cluster analysis (e.g. hierarchical cluster analysis or k-means cluster analysis) can lead to different solutions. Second, it is not clear how to identify the appropriate number of clusters either ex ante or ex post. The researcher can therefore apply a large amount of influence on her results from the way that she specifies the problem. The best available practical defence is to subject the results of a particular cluster analysis to a battery of sensitivity analyses, applying different cluster methods, using different subsamples of the data or prespecifying different numbers of clusters, for example. Section 6 presents and discusses such a sensitivity analysis exercise.

A further criticism, particularly of cluster analysis of sequences, is that the results have not generally been applied to further explanatory analysis with much success (Abbott and Tsay, 1999). We have in any case been unable to find any examples where clusters from career sequence data have been used successfully as a dependent variable in regression analysis. Our application, however, is one where a cluster analysis of sequences is shown to be amenable to this sort of further analysis (this is discussed in more detail in Section 5).

In our standard approach, we set the number of clusters to be 5 (see Section 6 for a discussion). We then use the OM output (distance matrix), based on the standard cost matrix, as the input to a hierarchical cluster analysis carried out in SPSS. The cluster method here was the 'between-groups linkage', one of the class of 'average linkage' methods, using as a distance measure the 'squared Euclidean distance' (see Alenderfer and Blashfield (1984), and Section 6 of this paper for a discussion of alternatives). The analysis is carried out on the full sample of 712 individuals over the full sample period of 72 months. Table 2 presents descriptions of the five clusters along with some information on the characteristics of their members.

Cluster 1, the largest cluster, is dominated by employment. The mean (with standard deviation in parentheses) number of months in employment within this cluster is 49.4 (13.7) compared with an overall sample mean of 32.2 (23.2). Most sample members in this cluster have a period in FE or training before moving into employment, in a few cases interspersed with spells of joblessness. For example, one fairly typical individual has 33 months of training, followed by 39 months of employment.

HE dominates cluster 2. Members of this cluster are either in school or FE or both for 2 or 3 years before moving into HE for 3 or 4 years. A typical example career is 23 months in school, 3 months jobless, 36 months in HE and the final 10 months in employment. Cluster 3 is less distinct, but dominated by FE. For example, one member has 21 months in

---


## Page 7

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;323&lt;/page_number&gt;

Table 2. Five-cluster solution—descriptions and background characteristics†

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Cluster</th>
      <th>N</th>
      <th>Description</th>
      <th>Mean number of months in school</th>
      <th>Mean number of months in FE</th>
      <th>Mean number of months in employment training</th>
      <th>Mean number of months in joblessness</th>
      <th>Mean number of months in HE</th>
      <th>Male Catholic (%)</th>
      <th>5 or more General Certificates of Secondary Education at 16 years of age (%)</th>
      <th>Father unemployed (%)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>308</td>
      <td>Employment dominated</td>
      <td>1.4 (4.5)</td>
      <td>8.4 (10.9)</td>
      <td>49.4 (13.7)</td>
      <td>8.8 (12.2)</td>
      <td>3.8 (7.1)</td>
      <td>0.1 (0.9)</td>
      <td>57</td>
      <td>43</td>
      <td>19</td>
      <td>14</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>184</td>
      <td>HE dominated</td>
      <td>18.7 (12.6)</td>
      <td>11.3 (14.8)</td>
      <td>3.3 (5.1)</td>
      <td>0.2 (1.3)</td>
      <td>1.5 (3.4)</td>
      <td>37.1 (9.1)</td>
      <td>41</td>
      <td>50</td>
      <td>87</td>
      <td>7</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>79</td>
      <td>FE dominated</td>
      <td>7 (11.6)</td>
      <td>33.5 (17.4)</td>
      <td>13.3 (8.3)</td>
      <td>3.2 (7.4)</td>
      <td>3.9 (7.4)</td>
      <td>11 (13.9)</td>
      <td>46</td>
      <td>46</td>
      <td>43</td>
      <td>21</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>47</td>
      <td>Joblessness dominated</td>
      <td>3.3 (7.4)</td>
      <td>4.9 (7.6)</td>
      <td>12.4 (12.2)</td>
      <td>7.9 (9.2)</td>
      <td>43.6 (12.9)</td>
      <td>0 (0)</td>
      <td>41</td>
      <td>59</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>37</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>95</td>
      <td>Long FE or training then employment</td>
      <td>6.0 (10.8)</td>
      <td>20.7 (17.2)</td>
      <td>22.8 (11.0)</td>
      <td>16.3 (20.1)</td>
      <td>5.5 (8.4)</td>
      <td>0.7 (2.7)</td>
      <td>44</td>
      <td>47</td>
      <td>30</td>
      <td>28</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Whole sample</td>
      <td>712</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>7.2 (8.5)</td>
      <td>11.7 (15.8)</td>
      <td>32.2 (23.2)</td>
      <td>6.9 (8.3)</td>
      <td>6.2 (12.4)</td>
      <td>8.4 (15.6)</td>
      <td>52</td>
      <td>48</td>
      <td>37</td>
      <td>16</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

†The sample numbers and cluster proportions are based on the weighted sample (see McVicar et al. (2000) for details about the weighting). Standard deviations are given in parentheses.

<footer>Wiley Online Library on 11/10/2020. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use. OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License</footer>
&lt;watermark&gt;2002, 2, 308-323&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 8

&lt;page_number&gt;324&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

employment followed by 51 months in FE. Another has these activities reversed, with a long spell of FE followed by employment.

Cluster 4 is of most interest given the policy context of the research—it is the cluster dominated by joblessness. The average (with standard deviation in parentheses) amount of joblessness experienced within this cluster is 43.6 (12.9) months compared with the sample average of 6.2 (12.4) months. So the cluster analysis creates a distinct ‘unsuccessful transition’ group (see Table 2 for a summary of the background characteristics of this group). Although occasional spells of joblessness can also be found dispersed across the other clusters, the average numbers of months in joblessness for the other clusters are all below the full sample average. More importantly, long spells of joblessness are not generally found in these other clusters. Instead, spells of joblessness are more likely to be characterized by a few months here and a few months there. Given this, there is enough distinction to believe that cluster 4 identifies most, if not quite all, of the unsuccessful transitions.

Many of the members of cluster 4 may not previously have been identified as ‘at risk’, by, for example, careers advisors, since most start their transitions in some form of education, training or employment. The picture is one of a significant group of young people (7% of the cohort) drifting into excluded positions between the ages of 17 and 19 years. One fairly typical individual has 11 months in FE before 61 months jobless. Another has 11 months in school, 18 months in employment and then 43 months jobless. Few begin their transitions with a long spell of joblessness.

Finally cluster 5 is dominated equally by long spells of FE or training. Treating these activities as one (vocational education or training) gives us a cluster mean (with standard deviation in parentheses) for months in vocational education or training of 34.9 (19.0). An example is 28 months in FE, followed by 3 months jobless, followed by 29 months in training and another 2 months jobless. Overall the clusters appear well defined and display significantly distinct properties compared with the full sample. Clusters 3 and 5 are the least well defined (a point which we return to below).

From Table 2, the clusters can also be distinguished by the (static) background characteristics of their members (which are not used in the cluster analysis itself). All display gender imbalances, with the employment cluster dominated by males and all others—particularly the HE and joblessness clusters—female dominated. Community differences are apparent in cluster 1 (Catholics are under-represented in employment-dominated transitions) and cluster 4 (Catholics are over-represented in joblessness-dominated transitions). Unsurprisingly, qualification levels display the most variation across clusters, with the unsuccessful transitions dominated by those with fewer qualifications at 16 years of age. Finally, our social class measure (father unemployed at the time of the survey) shows clearly that family background is correlated with the chances of successful transitions (particularly into HE) and unsuccessful transitions into joblessness.

It is apparent that OM-based cluster analysis can sort the sample into distinct groups, or types of transition. Further, the type of transition that young people experience appears to be related to their background characteristics. But people who drift into social exclusion or long-term joblessness are often characterized by several correlated disadvantages (multiple disadvantages in the sociology literature) and if we wish to disentangle these effects we need to turn to econometric analysis. In the following section we discuss a logit model where the transition type is the dependent variable and a list of background characteristics are the independent variables. In this way we hope to quantify what are the most important individual and background (observable) characteristics that can help to signal which young people are more likely to experience which types of transition.

---


## Page 9

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;325&lt;/page_number&gt;

## 5. A logit model of transition type

Abbott and Deviney (1992) attempted unsuccessfully to use the output of OM-based cluster analysis (sequence type) as a dependent variable in a regression analysis. Their results were either negligible or counter-intuitive (Abbott and Tsay, 1999). However, Abbott and Tsay (1999) identified several examples of sequence types being used with varying degrees of success as independent variables (see, for example, Poole and Holmes (1995), Carpenter (1996) and Han and Moen (1998)). Han and Moen, for example, found ‘career pathway type’ to have strong effects on the timing of retirement.

Our clusters appear distinct and appear to be related in many cases to the background characteristics of the cluster members. There is a fairly well-established set of causal factors in the economics and sociology literatures that can help to explain much of the movement into long-term joblessness among young people and more generally (see McVicar et al. (2000) for a review). Many of these commonly used explanatory factors are present in our data set. In these two respects, our data seemed to suggest that these sequence types might be sensibly treated as dependent variables in a regression equation to be explained by a set of background characteristics. The discussion that follows is based on the five-cluster solution, in turn based on the standard cost matrix. Section 6 discusses the sensitivity of the logit results to assumptions on the substitution costs, insertion and deletion costs and number of clusters.

The dependent variable for the logit model is defined as follows (model 1):
(a) $Y_i = 0$, if a young person has an employment-dominated transition (cluster 1);
(b) $Y_i = 1$, if a young person has an HE-dominated transition (cluster 2);
(c) $Y_i = 2$, if a young person has an FE-dominated transition (cluster 3);
(d) $Y_i = 3$, if a young person has a joblessness-dominated transition (cluster 4);
(e) $Y_i = 4$, if a young person has a long vocational education or training-dominated transition (cluster 5).

<table>
  <caption>Table 3. Logit model for the five-cluster solution—coefficients (relative probabilities)</caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Variable</th>
      <th colspan="4">Coefficients for the following comparisons:</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>Cluster 2 versus cluster 1</th>
      <th>Cluster 3 versus cluster 1</th>
      <th>Cluster 4 versus cluster 1</th>
      <th>Cluster 5 versus cluster 1</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Constant</td>
      <td>-3.55†</td>
      <td>-3.19†</td>
      <td>-1.87†</td>
      <td>-1.90†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Male</td>
      <td>-0.27</td>
      <td>-0.29</td>
      <td>-0.82§</td>
      <td>-0.49§</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Catholic</td>
      <td>0.21</td>
      <td>0.05</td>
      <td>0.45</td>
      <td>0.26</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>GCSE5</td>
      <td>2.98†</td>
      <td>1.16†</td>
      <td>-0.84</td>
      <td>0.68†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Grammar</td>
      <td>1.72†</td>
      <td>0.23</td>
      <td>-0.21</td>
      <td>0.25</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Funemp</td>
      <td>0.34</td>
      <td>0.82†</td>
      <td>1.02†</td>
      <td>1.11†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Fprof</td>
      <td>0.93†</td>
      <td>0.97†</td>
      <td>0.13</td>
      <td>0.89†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Livboth</td>
      <td>0.43</td>
      <td>1.03†</td>
      <td>-0.63§</td>
      <td>-0.35</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Belfast</td>
      <td>-1.10§</td>
      <td>0.25</td>
      <td>0.78</td>
      <td>1.00†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>West</td>
      <td>0.55</td>
      <td>0.69</td>
      <td>0.91</td>
      <td>0.14</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>South</td>
      <td>0.58§</td>
      <td>0.43</td>
      <td>0.20</td>
      <td>0.10</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Southeast</td>
      <td>0.83†</td>
      <td>0.86†</td>
      <td>-1.31</td>
      <td>0.71§</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

†Significant at 1%.
‡Significant at 5%.
§Significant at 10%.

---


## Page 10

&lt;page_number&gt;326&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

The original sample was stratified in such a way that a predetermined number of young people were in each activity immediately following completion of compulsory education at 16 years of age. Thus the probability of being in the sample in the first place is related to the model itself, or the sample is choice based (see, for example, Armstrong (1999)). Estimation therefore uses LIMDEP7's choice-based logit command. The sample is weighted by the first destination at 16 years, type of school attended (grammar or secondary) and location of school (five subregional areas). Further details of the weighting scheme can be found in McVicar et al. (2000). Estimation results (coefficients and marginal effects at sample means) are given in Tables 3 and 4.

The individual and background characteristics have significant explanatory power for the type of transition that young people experience. Because they are easier to interpret, the following discussion is based on the marginal effects reported in Table 4. The coefficients (Table 3) are reported for completeness.

Being male increases the likelihood of experiencing an employment-dominated transition and decreases the likelihood of experiencing an HE-, FE- or joblessness-dominated transition. This is consistent with existing evidence for Northern Ireland and elsewhere that suggests that females are more likely than males to stay on in post-compulsory education, other things being equal (see, for example, Armstrong (1999)). Existing evidence also shows that young females in Northern Ireland are generally more likely to be jobless than young males (see, for example, McVicar et al. (2000))—usually the result of staying home to look after children. Although not officially unemployed, many of these young women are at risk of increasing social exclusion. Hammer (1997) argued that, in many cases, previous spells of unemployment or joblessness drive young women to ‘retreat to the home’ rather than to persist with searching for a job.

Of particular interest in Northern Ireland are the differences in employment experiences between the Catholic and Protestant communities, where the rate of unemployment for

<table>
  <caption>Table 4. Logit model for the five-cluster solution—marginal effects at sample means</caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Variable</th>
      <th colspan="5">Marginal effects for the following clusters:</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>Cluster 1</th>
      <th>Cluster 2</th>
      <th>Cluster 3</th>
      <th>Cluster 4</th>
      <th>Cluster 5</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Constant</td>
      <td>0.69†</td>
      <td>−0.33†</td>
      <td>−0.25†</td>
      <td>−0.02†</td>
      <td>−0.09</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Male</td>
      <td>0.10†</td>
      <td>−0.01‡</td>
      <td>−0.01§</td>
      <td>−0.03†</td>
      <td>−0.05</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Catholic</td>
      <td>−0.05†</td>
      <td>0.02§</td>
      <td>−0.01</td>
      <td>0.01†</td>
      <td>0.03</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>GCSE5</td>
      <td>−0.35†</td>
      <td>0.34†</td>
      <td>0.07†</td>
      <td>−0.06†</td>
      <td>0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Grammar</td>
      <td>−0.16†</td>
      <td>0.21†</td>
      <td>−0.01</td>
      <td>−0.02†</td>
      <td>−0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Funemp</td>
      <td>−0.19†</td>
      <td>−0.01</td>
      <td>0.06†</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>0.12§</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Fprof</td>
      <td>−0.22†</td>
      <td>0.08†</td>
      <td>0.08†</td>
      <td>−0.01†</td>
      <td>0.08†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Livboth</td>
      <td>−0.06†</td>
      <td>0.05†</td>
      <td>0.13†</td>
      <td>−0.03†</td>
      <td>−0.08§</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Belfast</td>
      <td>−0.03</td>
      <td>−0.17†</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>0.15§</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>West</td>
      <td>−0.12†</td>
      <td>0.05†</td>
      <td>0.06†</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>−0.02</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>South</td>
      <td>−0.09†</td>
      <td>0.06†</td>
      <td>0.04†</td>
      <td>0.01</td>
      <td>−0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Southeast</td>
      <td>−0.15†</td>
      <td>0.08†</td>
      <td>0.08†</td>
      <td>−0.07†</td>
      <td>0.07</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Pseudo-R²</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>0.22</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

†Significant at 1%.
‡Significant at 10%.
§Significant at 5%.

---


## Page 11

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;327&lt;/page_number&gt;
Catholic males is consistently higher than the rate for Protestant males. Catholics have also been found to be more likely to stay on in post-compulsory education and training rather than to enter the labour market directly at 16 years of age (Armstrong et al., 1997). McVicar et al. (2000) found that this is reflected in lower numbers of jobless among Catholics for the first 2 years of transition than among Protestants. At 18 years and older, however, joblessness among Catholics, particularly jobless spells of long duration, increases to higher levels than among Protestants. This is reflected in the marginal effects of the Catholic dummy variable presented in Table 4. Other things being equal, Catholics are significantly more likely to experience an unsuccessful (joblessness-dominated) transition than Protestants are. As we would expect, they are less likely to experience an employment-dominated transition and more likely to experience an HE-dominated transition.

The GCSE5 variable is a binary dummy for having five or more General Certificates of Education at grades A-C at the end of compulsory education. These examinations are generally taken at 16 years of age and the achievement of five grades at A-C is the traditional cut-off point for progression onto further academic education (A-levels) and then on into HE. We would expect this to have significant effects on transition paths and this is indeed the case. There are strong positive effects on the likelihood of an HE- or FE-dominated transition and strong negative effects on the likelihood of an employment- or joblessness-dominated transition. This variable is not only acting as a qualifications variable but is also likely to be capturing part of the effect of the (unobserved) raw ability of the young people—we would expect the more ‘able’ young people to be less likely to experience an unsuccessful transition.

The grammar school variable may also be acting in this way since almost all those young people who attended grammar schools at 11–16 years had previously passed an eleven-plus examination. Again, the direction of the marginal effects supports this interpretation—young people who have attended grammar schools are more likely to experience HE-dominated transitions and less likely to experience employment- or joblessness-dominated transitions.

Three family background variables are included in the model: firstly, a dummy variable for having an unemployed father (at the time of the second sweep of the survey), secondly, a dummy variable for having a father whose current or most recent job was professional, managerial or related and, thirdly, a dummy for whether the young person lived with both parents at the age of 18 years (at the time of the first sweep of the survey). These all have effects that are intuitive and supported by existing studies (see, for example, McVicar et al. (2000)). Young people with unemployed fathers are more likely to experience unsuccessful joblessness-dominated transitions and less likely to experience employment-dominated transitions. They are also more likely to experience transitions that are characterized by prolonged periods in FE or training. Young people with professional fathers are more likely to experience HE- or FE-dominated transitions and less likely to move directly into employment at 16 or at 18 years of age and less likely to experience joblessness-dominated transitions. Young people who live with single parents are more likely to experience joblessness-dominated transitions or employment-dominated transitions and less likely to stay in education. They are more likely, however, to experience a prolonged spell of vocational education or training than young people living with both parents.

Finally, there are four subregional dummies (corresponding to Education and Library Board areas). Existing evidence suggests that Belfast and the west of Northern Ireland are disadvantaged in terms of the availability of jobs in local labour markets and in terms of social need more generally (see, for example, Robson et al. (1994)). The omitted area here is the north-east of Northern Ireland, which is characterized by the lowest unemployment rates in the region. Therefore marginal effects are expressed relative to the transition patterns of

---


## Page 12

&lt;page_number&gt;328&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

young people from the north-east. Consistent with existing evidence (e.g. McVicar et al. (2000)), young people from the west and from Belfast are more likely than their counterparts in the north-east to experience unsuccessful transitions. Those in the west are also less likely to experience an employment-dominated transition—which is likely to be reflecting the lack of job opportunities. Instead, young people from the west tend towards FE or HE, as do those from the south and south-east of the region.

The identification of the five separate states for the dependent variable can be tested by Cramer–Ridder tests of pooling outcomes (see Cramer and Ridder (1991)). In this case we carry out three separate tests for the aggregation of clusters 1 and 5, clusters 2 and 3 and clusters 3 and 5. Recall that cluster 1 is the employment-dominated cluster and that cluster 5 is the cluster for long vocational education or training followed by short periods of employment. Cluster 2 is the HE-dominated cluster and cluster 3 the FE-dominated cluster (but containing some members who go on to HE). Of all the clusters, 3 and 5 appear to be the least well determined, as discussed in the previous section. In each case the aggregation of these states is not supported by the tests so we retain the five-state disaggregated dependent variable as shown in model 1. The test statistics are 30.0, 45.2 and 9.7 respectively and are distributed $\chi^2$ with 12 degrees of freedom (the number of parameter restrictions in the model) giving a 5% critical value of 5.23. The null hypothesis is the pooling of states. In other words, the clusters identified by the cluster analysis are supported as being distinct ‘types’ for the purposes of the logit model.

In Section 1 we set out to ‘predict’ which young people were more likely to experience unsuccessful transitions, dominated by joblessness, and which were likely to experience successful transitions, not dominated by joblessness. The logit model suggests that young people with the following characteristics, in order of magnitude of the marginal effects, have higher chances of unsuccessful transitions:

(a) young people with poor qualifications at 16 years of age;
(b) young people from the west of Northern Ireland or from Belfast and not from the south-east or north-east of Northern Ireland;
(c) young people with unemployed fathers;
(d) young people not living with both parents at 18 years of age;
(e) females;
(f) Catholics;
(g) young people whose fathers are not in the professional, managerial or related employment category.

Abbott and Tsay (1999) remarked that ‘the proof of the classificatory pudding is in the explanatory eating’. In as much as this is the case, the results of the logit model of transition types described here—which are generally significant, intuitive and consistent with existing applied econometric research—support our OM and cluster-analysis-based typology of the transition from school to work. How much we can claim for these results depends to a large extent on how fragile or robust they are to making alternative assumptions at each stage. This is discussed in the next section.

## 6. Sensitivity analysis
### 6.1. Sensitivity to assumptions on substitution and insertion and deletion costs in the optimal matching analysis
The five-cluster solutions based on the OM analysis using the standard cost matrix but with high insertion and deletion costs and using the unit cost matrix are similar to, but not

---


## Page 13

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;329&lt;/page_number&gt;

identical with, the five-cluster solution outlined in Section 4 for the standard cost matrix with low insertion and deletion costs. The clusters that are identified are very similar in nature (e.g. a large employment-dominated cluster or a smaller joblessness-dominated cluster) to those outlined in Section 4, but cluster size and membership are not identical. For example, 589 of the 712 sample members are allocated to the same cluster in both the standard case and the unit cost case. Using the unit cost matrix gives a larger—but slightly less distinct—joblessness cluster. It has 101 members, with an average spell of joblessness of 27.6 months and a standard deviation of 19.4 months compared with an average of 43.4 months and a standard deviation of 13.0 months on the basis of the standard cost matrix. This reduction in the distinction of the joblessness cluster is a result of the lower substitution costs between joblessness and other activities.

The main difference between the standard cost matrix using the high insertion and deletion cost compared with the low insertion and deletion cost is the reduced size of cluster 5. Most of the members of cluster 5 from the low insertion and deletion cost analysis are now located in cluster 3. Given that clusters 3 and 5 appear to be the least distinct, the fact that their memberships are the most sensitive to changes in assumptions is not surprising. All else, however, appears robust.

Table 5 reports the marginal effects of the logit model based on the unit cost matrix five-cluster solution. Overall the results are similar to those based on the standard cost matrix. For example, all the marginal effects for clusters 1 and 2 for both models share the same signs. The marginal effects for cluster 4 also share the same signs with the exception of the male dummy variable which displays a positive effect in the unit cost matrix model. The ‘loosening’ of this cluster—which is characterized by more spells of employment interspersed with spells of joblessness—is the likely explanation for this. There are some differences between the models in the marginal effects for clusters 3 and 5 that result from switching members.

<table>
  <caption>Table 5. Logit model for the five-cluster solution based on the unit cost matrix—marginal effects at sample means</caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Variable</th>
      <th colspan="5">Marginal effects for the following clusters:</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>Cluster 1</th>
      <th>Cluster 2</th>
      <th>Cluster 3</th>
      <th>Cluster 4</th>
      <th>Cluster 5</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Cluster n</td>
      <td>326</td>
      <td>161</td>
      <td>38</td>
      <td>101</td>
      <td>86</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Constant</td>
      <td>0.49†</td>
      <td>-0.40†</td>
      <td>-0.07†</td>
      <td>-0.01</td>
      <td>-0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Male</td>
      <td>0.15†</td>
      <td>-0.03†</td>
      <td>0.01†</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>-0.16†</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Catholic</td>
      <td>-0.03</td>
      <td>0.07†</td>
      <td>-0.01†</td>
      <td>0.01†</td>
      <td>-0.05</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>GCSE5</td>
      <td>-0.31†</td>
      <td>0.45†</td>
      <td>-0.04†</td>
      <td>-0.10†</td>
      <td>0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Grammar</td>
      <td>-0.26†</td>
      <td>0.28†</td>
      <td>-0.01†</td>
      <td>-0.11†</td>
      <td>0.10§</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Funemp</td>
      <td>-0.08‡</td>
      <td>0.01</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>0.07†</td>
      <td>-0.03</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Fprof</td>
      <td>-0.12†</td>
      <td>0.10†</td>
      <td>0.01†</td>
      <td>-0.03†</td>
      <td>0.05</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Livboth</td>
      <td>-0.02</td>
      <td>0.11†</td>
      <td>0.01†</td>
      <td>-0.05†</td>
      <td>-0.04</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Belfast</td>
      <td>-0.11†</td>
      <td>-0.07†</td>
      <td>-0.05†</td>
      <td>0.02‡</td>
      <td>0.22‡</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>West</td>
      <td>-0.16†</td>
      <td>0.03</td>
      <td>0.03†</td>
      <td>0.07†</td>
      <td>0.03</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>South</td>
      <td>-0.08‡</td>
      <td>0.03</td>
      <td>0.02†</td>
      <td>0.02‡</td>
      <td>0.01</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Southeast</td>
      <td>-0.13†</td>
      <td>0.11†</td>
      <td>0.02†</td>
      <td>-0.15†</td>
      <td>0.15‡</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Pseudo-R²</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
      <td>0.22</td>
      <td></td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

†Significant at 1%.
‡Significant at 5%.
§Significant at 10%.

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 14

&lt;page_number&gt;330&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

### 6.2. Sensitivity to specification of the number of clusters
In the analysis above we have set the number of clusters at 5. Our reasons for this stem from the trade-off between the number of values that the dependent variable can take in the logit model (not too many), the size of each cluster (not too small) and the level of distinction of each cluster (not too few clusters). But what happens if we specify three clusters, or 10?

Fig. 2 shows each stage of the evolution of clusters from the two-cluster solution to the 10-cluster solution (using hierarchical cluster analysis). It is the HE-dominated cluster (cluster 2 in our five-cluster solution) that is the first to break off. This remains intact up to 10 clusters. The next to break off (at the three-cluster solution) is the long vocational education and training group (cluster 5 in our five-cluster solution). This also remains intact until the 10-cluster solution where a small group with experience of longish spells of joblessness splits off. At the four-cluster solution, the FE group (cluster 3 in our five-cluster solution) separates. This group splits again at the six-cluster solution into those who go on to HE from FE and those who do not. That this group is the most sensitive to our choice of five clusters is perhaps not surprising given its relative lack of distinction. The joblessness cluster first breaks off from the main cluster at the five-cluster solution but remains together until the eight-cluster solution where a very small subgroup of those who stayed on at school before joblessness splits off.

Evidently, we need to specify at least five clusters to identify what we have labelled the ‘unsuccessful’ transitions. However, Cramer–Ridder tests rule out pooling the joblessness and employment categories in the logit model so we would be unwise to reduce the number of clusters below 5. Increasing the disaggregation (increasing the number of clusters) has little effect on this joblessness cluster.

So, we cannot estimate a logit model with fewer than the five clusters or we shall lose the unsuccessful transition cluster. But what of estimating a model with more than the five clusters? The problem here is that adding clusters leads to a proliferation of the parameters that the model must estimate, so we are reluctant to go much above six clusters. However, the logit model for the six-cluster case (where the FE cluster has split into two groups) gives results that are very similar to those presented in Tables 3 and 4 for the five-cluster case. The coefficients and marginal effects change very little for the joblessness cluster and for the other clusters. The most change is unsurprisingly seen in the estimates for cluster 3. However, even these estimates appear broadly robust, probably since the group that breaks off from cluster 3 is small. Of course, it would have been very helpful if a Cramer–Ridder test had suggested pooling the newly split FE clusters to give us the five-cluster logit model—unfortunately it does not.

### 6.3. Sensitivity to particular cluster analysis techniques
Different clustering techniques can sometimes lead to different outcomes. So far all our cluster analysis has been based on ‘between-groups linkage’ hierarchical clustering. Other hierarchical methods give similar patterns of results with one or two exceptions (six alternative approaches that are available within SPSS were tried and the results are available from the authors on request). Here we give details of the clustering exercise based on the standard cost matrix using $k$-means clustering. Once again we set the number of clusters to 5.

The $k$-means technique also gives clusters that are broadly similar to those from the hierarchical technique—in particular the joblessness- and HE-dominated clusters are very similar. In this case, the joblessness cluster has a mean number of months in joblessness of

---


## Page 15

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;331&lt;/page_number&gt;

&lt;img&gt;
A dendrogram showing the clustering of individuals based on their educational and employment transitions. The top level shows two main groups: N=576 Non-HE and N=136 (2) HE dominated. The Non-HE group splits into N=493 All others and N=83 (5) Long vocational education or training. The All others group further splits into N=416 Employment and unemployment and N=77 (3) FE. Employment and unemployment splits into N=369 (1) Employment and N=47 (4) Joblessness dominated. Employment splits into N=272 Employment non-direct and N=97 Employment direct. Joblessness dominated splits into N=42 Other jobless and N=5 School then jobless. FE splits into N=51 FE, non-HE and N=26 FE-HE. N=42 splits into N=10 Non-FE and N=41 Purer FE. N=5 splits into N=16 Longer jobless and N=67 others. A dashed line indicates the five-cluster solution, and a solid line indicates the ten-cluster solution.
&lt;/img&gt;

Fig. 2. Dendrogram for k-cluster solutions, k = 1–10: members of the five-cluster solution are identified by the numbers in parentheses

42.5 and a standard deviation of 12.4. However, the employment-dominated cluster from our earlier analysis is here spread over two roughly equal-sized clusters. One is characterized by 2 or 3 years of education or training and then employment. The other is characterized by less than 2 years' education or training and then employment (including those who enter employment directly). Clusters 3 and 5 from the earlier analysis are here pooled into a larger

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 16

&lt;page_number&gt;332&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

cluster characterized by at least four years of education or training, mostly followed by 1 or 2 years' employment.

Since both hierarchical and $k$-means methods identify a very similar and clear joblessness cluster, along with broadly similar other clusters, our results appear robust to the choice of a particular method. As we would expect, the logit model shows marginal effects for the joblessness cluster based on $k$-means that are very similar to those presented in Table 4.

### 6.4. Robustness across samples
All the analysis has so far been based on the full sample that is available from the Status Zero Survey. There are no other similar data (e.g. data for another cohort) with which we can test the robustness of our results across samples. However, we can subdivide our current sample and rerun the analysis to check for sensitivity. The sample is split in half randomly and the OM and cluster analysis, specifying five clusters, is repeated.

The clusters identified in each half-sample are broadly similar to those identified in the full sample. Both half-samples display HE-dominated clusters of roughly equal size. Both display joblessness-dominated clusters, also of roughly equal size. In one case, the employment-dominated cluster is split in two (longer and shorter initial spells in education or training), leaving a single FE-dominated cluster. In the other case, there is a single employment-dominated cluster and two FE- or training-dominated clusters. The jobless cluster in the first half-sample has mean months of joblessness of 46.6 with standard deviation 11.6. The second half-sample joblessness cluster has mean months of joblessness 46.2 with standard deviation 8.9. In other words, the joblessness cluster for each half-sample displays characteristics that are almost identical with those of the full sample joblessness cluster. The logit model is estimated for each half-sample. Given the similarity in the cluster solutions, the logit solutions are unsurprisingly also similar.

### 7. Concluding remarks
This paper shows how sequence techniques can be used to create a typology of transitions from school to work—in particular distinguishing unsuccessful transitions dominated by joblessness from broadly successful transitions dominated by employment or extended education. This typology is then used here as the basis of a logit model where young peoples' transition types can be 'predicted' from their background characteristics. The results of this exercise are intuitive, consistent with existing evidence based on more standard stochastic approaches and generally robust to a large number of changes in specification.

The paper adds value to the existing literature in two main respects. Firstly, on the technical side, we successfully used the output of cluster analysis of sequences, itself based on OM analysis, as the dependent variable in a regression equation for transition type. Previous attempts at using cluster analyses of sequences in this way before have had little success. Our intuition for why we might have made more progress on this front is that our data—and our problem—are ideally suited to such an exercise. Further, given that the particular sequence of states is important here (we want to be able to distinguish those who 'fall into' joblessness from those who manage to 'escape' from joblessness), OM gives us something that other sequence techniques do not.

Secondly, the typology of unsuccessful transitions and the results showing how young people's transition types depend on their individual and family background characteristics can contribute to an 'early warning system' for policy makers who are concerned with

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on 11/05/2026. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 17

<header>Predicting Transitions from School to Work</header>
&lt;page_number&gt;333&lt;/page_number&gt;

reducing the drift of significant numbers of young people into long-term joblessness and social exclusion. For instance, certain types of young people may benefit more from certain types of personal advisors or mentors than others. Equally, if resources are insufficient to give advice or help to all young people approaching the end of compulsory education, it is those from the west with disadvantaged family backgrounds and poor qualifications (or expected qualifications) who may benefit most from intervention. This is true even for many of those who plan to stay on in education or training. In short, policy makers could target resources according to the predicted probabilities of young people following each transition type (particularly the joblessness type).

Of course, to target early interventions, we must make the assumption that what is true for one cohort is true to some extent for another cohort. We are not quite at the stage where we can put background characteristics in one end and obtain an exact prediction of transition patterns out at the other end--but we can identify young people who are more at risk of experiencing unsuccessful transitions. Further research may reduce the uncertainty.

## Acknowledgements

We thank the two referees and participants at the 2001 Royal Economic Society Conference for helpful comments. We are also grateful to the Training and Employment Agency for supporting the collection of the original survey data on which this paper is based. The research is part of the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre's human resources and economic development research programme supported by the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Investment and the Department of Finance and Personnel. All views are those of the authors.

## References

Abbott, A. and Deviney, S. (1992) The welfare state as transnational event. *Socl Sci. Hist.*, **16**, 245–274.
Abbott, A. and Forrest, J. (1986) Optimal matching methods for historical data. *J. Interdisc. Hist.*, **16**, 473–496.
(1990) The optimal matching method for anthropological data. *J. Quant. Anthr.*, **2**, 151–170.
Abbott, A. and Hrycak, A. (1990) Measuring resemblance in social sequences. *Am. J. Sociol.*, **96**, 144–185.
Abbott, A. and Tsay, A. (1999) Sequence analysis and optimal matching methods in sociology: review and prospect. *Mimeo*. University of Chicago, Chicago.
Aldenderfer, M. S. and Blashfield, R. K. (1984) *Cluster Analysis*. London: Sage.
Anyadike-Danes, M. and McVicar, D. (2000) Characterising the transition from school to work in Northern Ireland: alternative data analytic strategies. *Conf. Applied Statistics in Ireland*, Rosslare, May 17th–19th.
Armstrong, D. (1999) School performance and staying-on: a micro analysis for Northern Ireland. *Manch. School*, **67**, 203–230.
Armstrong, D., Istance, D., Loudon, R., McCready, S., Rees, G. and Wilson, D. (1997) *Status 0: a Socio-economic Study of Young People on the Margin*. Belfast: Training and Employment Agency.
Armstrong, D. and McVicar, D. (2000) Value added in further education and vocational training in Northern Ireland. *Appl. Econ.*, **32**, 1727–1736.
Carpenter, D. (1996) Corporate identity and administrative capacity in executive departments. *PhD Dissertation*. University of Chicago, Chicago.
Cramer, J. S. and Ridder, G. (1991) Pooling states in the multinomial logit model, *J. Econometr.*, **47**, 267–272.
Dijkstra, W. and Taris, T. (1995) Measuring the agreement between sequences. *Sociol. Meth. Res.*, **24**, 214–231.
Halpin, B. and Chan, T.-W. (1998) Class careers as sequences. *Eur. Sociol. Rev.*, **14**, 111–130.
Hammer, T. (1997) History dependence in youth unemployment. *Eur. Sociol. Rev.*, **13**, 17–33.
Han, S.-K. and Moen, P (1998) Clocking out. *Mimeo*. Cornell University, Ithaca.
Hannan, D. F. and Doyle, A. (2000) Changing school-to-work transitions: three cohorts 1982–1987; 1986–1992; 1992–1998. *Mimeo*. Economic and Social Research Institute, Dublin.
van der Heijden, P., Teunissen, J. and van Orle, C. (1997) Multiple Correspondence Analysis as a tool for quantification of career data. *J. Educ. Behav. Statist.*, **22**, 447–477.
McVicar, D., Loudon, R., McCready, S., Armstrong, D. and Rees, G. (2000) *Young People and Social Exclusion in Northern Ireland: Status 0 Four Years on*. Belfast: Training and Employment Agency.

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;

---


## Page 18

&lt;page_number&gt;334&lt;/page_number&gt;
D. McVicar and M. Anyadike-Danes

Morgan, B. J. T. and Roy, A. P. G. (1995) Non-uniqueness and inversions in cluster analysis. *Appl. Statist.*, **44**, 117–134.

Poole, M. S. and Holmes, M. E. (1995) Decision development in computer assisted group decision-making. *Hum. Commun. Res.*, **22**, 90–127.

Robson, B., Bradford, M. and Deas, I. (1994) Relative deprivation in Northern Ireland. *Occasional Paper 28*. Policy, Planning and Research Unit, Department of Finance and Personnel, Belfast.

Sankoff, D. and Kruskal, J. B. (eds) (1983) *Time Warps, String Edits and Macromolecules*. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

Stovel, K., Savage, M. and Bearman, P. (1996) Ascription into achievement. *Am. J. Sociol.*, **102**, 358–399.

Taris, T. W. (2000) *A Primer in Longitudinal Data Analysis*. London: Sage.

&lt;watermark&gt;1467985x, 2002, 2, Downloaded from https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/10.1111/1467-985X.00641 by Oxford University, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License&lt;/watermark&gt;